From the New York Times, I'm Michael
Vubaro. This is the Daily.
President Trump's decision to try to
fire a member of the Federal Reserve's
governing board is his most audacious
attack yet on the independence of the
country's central bank.
Today, Ben Castleman on the story of how
Trump decided that the road to taking
over the Fed ran through an economics
professor named Lisa Cook.
[Applause]
It's Wednesday, August 27th.
[Music]
Thanks for doing this on short,
relatively short notice. We appreciate
that.
>> Yeah, happy to do it. I mean, it's never
good news when I'm on when I'm on this
show.
>> No, it's never good news on you're on
this show ever.
>> Shall we get started? Ben,
>> let's do it. Okay,
Ben, just to start, tell us about the
Federal Reserve governor now at the
center of this political, economic, and
we assume soon enough legal firestorm.
Lisa Cook is a really remarkable figure.
I've spent quite a bit of time with her
over the years studying her career from
before she joined the Fed Board of
Governors before we started this whole
controversy that she's in the middle of
now. And you know, it starts in the
1960s in Georgia.
I was growing up in the desegregating
South and this was called uh freedom of
choice period. So, white parents could
choose to go to a school or they started
their own white flight schools.
>> And she tells a really powerful story,
including in an interview with the
International Monetary Fund a few years
ago about this period where schools
across the South are being desegregated.
And she and her sisters are literally
the ones doing the desegregation.
>> Some of them weren't accustomed, I
guess, to seeing uh black children. So,
I was I was definitely beaten up.
>> And she's attacked, physically attacked
by a classmate called a racial epithet.
>> And the reason I know that it was a
racist incident was because the child
called me the n-word, and I'd uh never
heard it before and went home to ask
what that meant
>> and bears to this day a physical scar
above her eye from that incident.
>> Wow. Uh, I still have a scar where I was
hit in my eyebrow.
>> Eventually, she goes to Spelman College
in Atlanta and kind of by the by falls
in love with economics. I mean, she says
she didn't set out to become an
economist.
>> I figured it out as it happened at
another place I never thought I might
get to, Mount Kilamanjaro in Tanzania.
But she fell in love with economics
while climbing Mount Kilimanjaro as one
does.
>> Um as as one does among us. I was hiking
alongside a British economist who by the
end of the track had me convinced that
economics possessed the tools to address
some really big and important questions
and then goes on goes to University of
California Berkeley earns a a PhD in
economics and is really a pioneer as a
as a black woman in economics. I mean
there really were not many at that time
and and frankly still are not that many.
It's a field that is really
>> male and white.
>> Male and white to this day. And she's
talked about how that identity informed
the work that she did as an economist,
>> which is what
>> so her specialty is international
relations. She's a expert on Russia. Uh
she and spent time there. She's worked
at the Treasury. She's worked in the
White House. But probably her best known
research really grows out of her own
experience.
>> I uh sort of cut my teeth working in an
environment under uncertainty in the
1990s in Russia, right? So uh that's a
level of uncertainty that I wouldn't
wish on any economy.
>> There's this major strain of research in
economics about the importance of
innovation to growth. and she's talked
about how she sort of had this insight
that it's pretty hard to innovate if you
don't feel safe and if you're not being
protected by the state.
>> Uncertainty is a tax. It is a tax.
>> It is a tax on businesses. They can't
plan. They don't know how to invest in
this environment and it keeps changing.
So
>> she talked about this in the context of
Russia and posts Soviet Russia, but she
researched it in the context of
postreonstruction
America
>> and looking at patent applications by
black Americans during the period of
lynchings and racial violence in the
South coming out of reconstruction.
And perhaps unsurprisingly once you stop
and think about it, but something that
had not been researched when black
Americans were facing lynchings, they
weren't filing a lot of patent
applications,
>> right? Oppressed people do not have the
freedom to innovate.
>> Don't have the freedom to innovate.
Don't have the freedom to invent. Don't
have the freedom to start businesses.
And that of course has very significant
implications for that specific group of
people. But it also has implications and
this is really where her research went
for the economy more broadly that if we
want to ensure that we have the fastest
growing and most innovative and most
flexible economy possible, we need to
make sure that all of our citizens are
protected and feel physically safe and
have their rights protected so that they
can go and do these things. So on on the
strength of that research and on other
work, she goes on to a successful
academic career and takes on a really
prominent role in trying to really
reform economics from inside to try to
diversify it to try to diversify the set
of perspectives
and that brings her onto the radar
increasingly of the sort of leaders of
the economics profession and eventually
to President Biden who in 2022 has an
opening on the Federal Reserve Board of
Governors. this very powerful set of
policy makers and and he nominates her
to fill one of those slots.
>> Mhm. A slot which we should say makes
her one of the most important people in
the US economy and in that sense the
global economy.
>> Yeah, absolutely. There there are seven
Fed governors. We we always talk about
the chair, right? You and I and and you
and my colleagues have talked many times
about Jay Powell and before that Janet
Yellen, but there's a board of governors
and and a larger committee of of folks
who make these decisions. They all get a
vote. The chair doesn't carry extra
weight. And and in nominating her,
President Biden is setting her up to
have enormous sway over the direction of
the economy.
>> Mhm.
>> And how did the confirmation vote go?
>> Thanks, Senator Warner. Senator Hagerty
of Tennessee is recognized.
>> Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh
>> it was it was a squeaker.
>> But even more concerning to me with
respect to your nomination,
>> is that your background although very
impressive as you covered this identity
>> doesn't seem related to the mission of
the Federal Reserve. If I look at your
list of publications and your speeches,
it seems more like social science than
it does economics and monetary policy.
Could you describe?
>> She faced a lot of opposition. She faced
a lot of attacks over her
qualifications, over her academic
record.
>> Why?
>> Thank you. Well, monetary policy is a
very blunt and a very potent tool,
>> and I would have expected someone with
deeper experience in the monetary policy
realm. Uh but I appreciate you being
here and thank you for your
>> Well, so it's important to remember this
is a moment when the Senate is divided
50/50 between Democrats and Republicans
>> and this is sort of the the early days
right of the sort of Republican push
back against DEI and wokeism uh that
we've seen of course continue and and
gain strength under President Trump. Uh
now I should say most the economists I
talked to push back against that very
strongly say that she had a record that
you know was uh equivalent to many folks
who have been uh nominated successfully
for the Fed in the past. Not probably
the strongest academic credentials that
we've seen on the Fed, but uh notably uh
Jerome Powell doesn't have a PhD in
economics at all. So but she faced a lot
of opposition and and the vote
ultimately came down to a 50/50 tie
>> on this vote. The A's are 50. The nays
are 50. The Senate being equally
divided. The vice president votes in the
affirmative and the nomination is
confirmed.
>> It was broken by Kla Harris and put Lisa
Cook on the board of governors.
>> And that of course is where Lisa Cook
starts to intersect unknowingly
with President Trump's vision of the
Federal Reserve. At that moment, he's
out of office, but he and those around
him are formulating plans for a return
to power with documents like Project
2025,
and they're rethinking the relationship
between the president and the Fed.
>> Yeah. I mean, you may recall that in his
first term, President Trump was
frequently very critical of the Fed and
of J. Powell, even though he was the one
who had made J. Powell the chair,
>> right? and had tried to pressure him
into lowering interest rates back then.
And by the time Trump returned to
office, he really pretty clearly had
this vision of taking more direct
control over the Fed. He he didn't waste
any time in starting to badger Powell
and and the Fed more generally to lower
interest rates and to sort of serve his
goals, right, which was very much at
odds with the traditional vision of the
Fed. We've talked about this a lot on
the show as an independent policymaking
body because the thinking has always
been you want economists who are
thinking about the numbers and the
long-term health of the economy driving
those decisions at the Fed, not a
president thinking about reelection in
politics. Yeah. The whole idea of Fed
independence is this sort of bedrock
concept. That's clearly not a vision
that Trump shares. And you know, pretty
quickly this badgering of Powell turns
into real threats to fire him and he
takes real steps in that direction.
>> Right?
>> He's sort of eventually persuaded not to
go through with that,
>> right? The thinking is it would be
potentially cataclysmic in the markets.
>> That's the thinking that he appears to
have been convinced of that at least for
the time being. But he has not given up
on this vision of trying to control the
Fed and bend it to his will. And so he's
looking for another way to achieve that.
And that eventually leads him to target
the board of governors and specifically
to target Lisa Cook.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Ben, once President Trump and those
around him decide that they want to try
to gain control over the Fed by
targeting its board of governors, how do
they find their way to Lisa Cucka? So
just remember the math here for a
minute.
>> Of the seven members of the board of
governors when Trump takes office,
five of them are Biden appointees. Two
of them were nominated by Trump during
his first term. One of those positions
has already come vacant. So now Trump
will have three. To have a majority of
the board, he needs a fourth.
>> You are good at math.
>> You know, this is why you have me on.
It's the math. So he he needs one more.
None of those positions are actually
coming up anytime very soon.
>> Right. Cuz the appointments are long.
>> The appointments are intentionally long
so that they're not subject to political
interference.
So the only way for him to get a
majority of the board is to fire
someone. And that's not an easy thing to
do because under the Federal Reserve
Act, which I'm sure you have read many
times under the law that governs the
Fed, governors can only be fired for
cause.
>> And cause generally means their election
of duty, malfence, gross misconduct is
pretty pretty significant.
>> Yeah. It's not meant to be something
light and it's generally somehow related
to the job that they have been appointed
to do. This is of course the battle
that's been going on about the
possibility of Trump firing Powell is
that he would need cause to oust Powell.
He generally is not thought to have it.
So he's looking around at other Fed
governors.
>> Could he find it there?
>> Could he find it there? And riding to
his rescue is Bill Py, a man you may
have never heard of.
>> Not until now. who runs an agency you
may not have heard of or certainly don't
spend a lot of time thinking of
>> which is what
>> which is the Federal Housing Finance
Administration
the FHFA
and how does he ride to Trump's rescue
here so Bill Py despite being in this
sort of anonymous agency has kind of
emerged as one of Trump's premier attack
dogs enforcers but in particular he has
used his position as the head of this
mortgage agency, which gives him access
to all of these records, right? Millions
of records on people's mortgages to mine
those records for potentially damaging
information against some of Trump's
perceived enemies.
>> So, he accuses Leticia James, who's the
New York Attorney General, who helped
lead investigations into President
Trump's business practices. He accuses
her of mortgage fraud.
He does the same against Adam Schiff,
senator from California, accuses him of
mortgage fraud. Schiff helped lead the
investigation in the Trump impeachment
trial during President Trump's first
term.
>> And last week, sort of out of nowhere,
he does the same to Lisa Cook, to our
central character here.
[Music]
It seems worth noting that both Leticia
James and Lisa Cook are black women. In
fact, black women who are the first
black women to hold their respective
jobs. Yeah, that's right. And and we
don't know why Lisa Cook was targeted or
whether race played any role in that. We
do know that the Trump administration
has often gone after people of color as
it's been sort of taking the levers of
power in government.
And what exactly does Bill PY accuse
Lisa Cook of doing when it comes to
mortgages? So specifically, he says that
in 2021, she bought a home in Michigan
where she was a professor at Michigan
State
and claims it in mortgage documents as
her primary residence.
Typically, when you buy a home, if it's
your primary residence, you can get a
lower interest rate on your mortgage.
>> Um, the bank thinks you're going to be
very reliable when it comes to paying
for your primary residence.
>> Yes, your primary residence. You're not
going to risk losing that. Uh so
typically you can get a lower interest
rate. We we crucially we don't know here
whether Lisa Cook did get a lower
interest rate, but it seems likely that
she did.
>> Two weeks later,
Bill Py alleges she bought another home
condo in Atlanta and also claims that in
mortgage documents as her primary
residence. Got it. Now, you can only
have one primary residence at a time.
And so, the allegation here is that one
of those homes could not have been her
primary residence. And that therefore
that that was a form of mortgage fraud.
>> Mhm. Certainly doesn't look good, but is
it fraud?
>> Yeah, it doesn't look good. Right. She's
buying two homes in two weeks, claiming
them both as her primary residence. That
doesn't seem great. But look, we haven't
seen the documents here. We don't know
if there were mitigating circumstances.
We don't know if this was an oversight,
a mistake,
>> and none of this has been adjudicated,
right? None of this has gone to a court.
There's been no evidence presented. So,
we we don't know at this stage
>> what we don't know
>> what we don't know. And we don't we
certainly don't know that it's fraud at
this point. What we do know is that
President Trump immediately seizes on
this as the cause he needs to push out
Dr. Cook as a member of the board of
governors.
>> Literally for cause requires a cause. He
says this is my cause.
>> Yeah. Initially he calls on her to
resign. Then he says if she doesn't
resign he'll fire her. And then when she
doesn't resign, he sends her a letter
saying that she is terminated, effective
immediately, for cause. He accuses her
of quote deceitful and potentially
criminal conduct in a financial matter.
And he says that for those reasons, he's
firing her. And from what you can tell
based on your reporting, is the
president on strong legal footing here
in claiming that this is cause to fire
her? that writing that she has two
primary residences in mortgage documents
is that legal justification. So, we
don't know, but we're gonna find out
because Lisa Cook says she's not
resigning and in fact is suing to hold
on to her position. And so, this is
going to be decided in a court of law.
But we've spent the last uh 24 hours
frantically calling legal experts and
and lawyers trying to understand this.
And they say basically probably not.
Trump probably does not have
particularly strong legal argument here.
This involves private conduct from
before she was a Fed governor. It uh
hasn't been tested in a court of law.
But she now serves in a job where a big
part of her role is to help set interest
rates that include mortgage rates.
>> Right?
>> So you can see a thread of a connection
there. Whether that holds legally, we'll
see. Again, certainly optically, right,
it's not a good look.
>> Mhm. But as you say, she is determined
to stay in this job. So, putting the
legal debate aside for just a moment,
I'm curious as a student of the Fed and
the American economy, what you have made
of this firing, this saga, what has just
been your gut reaction to it? So, look,
we can have the legal debate and the
legal debate will play itself out, but I
I don't think we should be naive here,
right? This wasn't a general crackdown
on mortgage fraud that happened to catch
up Lisa Cook, right? This was a targeted
effort by the White House to find
somebody on the board that they could
find cause to fire so that the president
can take control of the Fed. That's
what's going on here. Mhm.
>> And as you and I have talked about many
times, the independence of the Fed is
really central to the functioning of the
US economy and the global financial
system. And this is the clearest, most
present danger to that that we've seen
in decades. That said, we have heard a
lot of doomsday scenarios articulated
since the beginning of this
administration. tariffs were going to be
the ruin of the US economy. That really
hasn't come to pass.
Isn't it very possible he's going to
eventually take over the Fed and
everything's going to be fine?
I mean, look, Michael, I I came in today
waiting for some big reaction in the
financial markets. We didn't get it.
Markets look fine. And this isn't the
first time I think that you and I have
sat together ready for a big reaction in
the financial markets that did not come.
>> Mhm. So markets aren't everything,
right? But that is an indication that
certainly many investors don't think
that this is an imminent disaster. And
as you say, the economy has so far held
up more or less fine, right? There there
are cracks here and there, right? But
it's not like we're plunging off a
cliff.
>> So we don't know where that heads. But I
do think there is something important
about the idea that we have data that we
can trust, that we have institutions
that operate with a measure of
independence, and we wouldn't expect to
see the impact of these kinds of
assaults on those institutions today,
tomorrow, even next year. Right? These
are things that have taken a generation
to build up and it could take time for
the effects of their erosion to show
through, but that doesn't mean that
those effects are not real.
>> Mhm. I wonder what Professor Lisa Cook
would think about all of this. her most
important research and as you said
was around what happens when you don't
feel safe and secure in your position
when your government doesn't protect
you. One fairly indisputable fact in
this moment is that people who work for
the United States government don't feel
safe and secure in their work. And I
wonder what Professor Cook would say
about the implications of that.
Yeah. I mean, a couple of people have
made the point to me that there is an
irony here that in some ways the person
who has the most insight into this
moment in the US economy,
at least at the Fed,
is Dr. Lisa Cook.
Not only when it comes to maybe the fear
that government employees are feeling,
but the fear that people living in the
US in some cases are feeling right now,
that that people in immigrant
communities, that people who feel
threatened in different ways, right, may
be feeling right now, that could have a
real economic impact that the Fed might
really like to understand right now as
they're setting policy. If this firing
goes through, they'll have to have that
conversation without the benefit of the
expertise of Lisa Cook.
Well, Ben, thank you very much. Thanks
for having me.
>> We'll have a majority very shortly, so
that'll be great.
>> During a cabinet meeting on Tuesday,
President Trump predicted that he would
soon control a majority of the Federal
Reserve's Board of Governors and would
use that power to lower interest rates.
Once we have a majority and housing is
going to swing and it's going to be
great. People are paying too high an
interest rate. That's the only problem
with housing.
>> And he suggested that he plans to move
quickly to nominate a replacement for
Lisa Cook, raising the possibility that
Trump may name Cook's successor even as
she remains in the job and fights his
efforts to fire her.
We'll be right back.
[Music]
Here's what else you need to know today.
On Tuesday, the Israeli military said
that its deadly attack on a Gaza
hospital on Monday, which killed 20
people, five of them journalists, was
intended to destroy an observation
camera that it claimed had been placed
there by Hamas. But Israeli officials
provided no evidence for that claim. And
media organizations said that they
regularly use the same location for live
streaming their reports out of Gaza.
hand.
[Music]
The world's biggest pop star and the
NFL's best known current player are now
engaged to be married. In a post to
their combined 288 million followers,
Taylor Swift and Travis Kelsey shared
the news on Tuesday afternoon. Taylor
Swift is engaged. Taylor Swift is
engaged.
>> Oh, it's huge. The ring is ginormous.
This is so exciting.
>> No, I'm going to throw up. I'm going to
throw up.
[Music]
[Applause]
>> Drawing reactions from across the
country.
>> Well, I wish him a lot of luck
>> and even from the White House.
>> I think he's a great guy and I think
that she's a terrific person. So, I wish
them a lot of luck. Their romance has
been obsessively chronicled since it
began 2 years ago and has fascinated
fans of Swift, whose song lyrics have
detailed the ups and downs of her love
life in at times extraordinary levels of
detail.
[Music]
Today's episode was produced by Eric
Kropky, Rob Zipco, and Mujade with help
from Michelle Bonja. It was edited by
Liz O Balen, contains research help from
Susan Lee and was engineered by Alyssa
Moxley.
That's it for the daily. I'm Michael
Bavaro. See you tomorrow.
[Music]